During the summer, Harry Potter is left frustrated by his lack of involvement in Dumbledore's efforts to combat a newly-resurgent Lord Voldemort. One evening, he is attacked by Dementors, causing a group of wizards belonging to the Order of the Phoenix, to evacuate him from the Dursley residence. They whisk him off to Number 12, Grimmauld Place, Sirius Black's childhood home, which is now headquarters for the Order. Harry learns from Ron and Hermione, that the Order is a secret organisation created by Dumbledore, dedicated to fighting Voldemort and the Death Eaters. Harry wants to join, but Ron's mother, Molly disapproves.

Harry is the target of a Ministry-led smear campaign, under Cornelius Fudge, to malign him for stating that Voldemort has returned. Dolores Umbridge, a senior Ministry employee, becomes the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts. She initiates strict rules and a textbook-only approach, forbidding practice of defensive spells by students. This leads Harry, Ron, and Hermione to form their own Defence group with other students called Dumbledore's Army, who secretly meet in the Room of Requirement to practise under Harry's instruction.

One night, Harry has a vision of Arthur Weasley being attacked by Voldemort's snake, Nagini, which turns out to be true. Arthur is rescued, but Dumbledore realises that Harry's and Voldemort's minds are connected. He arranges for Professor Snape to teach Harry Occlumency, a skill where one closes their mind against others. Umbridge is tipped-off about Dumbledore's Army; to prevent Harry's expulsion for forming a secret organization, Dumbledore takes responsibility for the group, then goes into hiding to evade arrest. Umbridge is appointed headmistress.

Harry's Occlumency lessons go poorly. During exams, he has a vision of Sirius being tortured by Voldemort in the Department of Mysteries at the Ministry. While trying to contact Sirius at Grimmauld Place, Harry is caught by Umbridge using her office's Floo Network. She questions Harry and threatens to use the Cruciatus Curse on him. Hermione intervenes, and concocts a story that leads them into the Forbidden Forest. Umbridge provokes the centaurs there and they take her captive.

Harry, Ron, Hermione, Ginny, Neville and Luna, fly to the Ministry to save Sirius, but he is not to be found inside the Department of Mysteries. Instead, the room is filled with shelves of glass spheres, one of which bears Harry's name along with Voldemort. Harry picks it up, and is immediately surrounded by Death Eaters. Lucius Malfoy reveals that Harry was tricked there by a fake vision from Voldemort, and that he wishes to hear the prophecy contained in the glass sphere. He asks Harry for the sphere, but Harry refuses. The Hogwarts group fight against the Death Eaters and evade them, aided by the arrival of the Order members. Neville accidentally drops and breaks the prophecy, and Sirius ends up dying at the hands of Bellatrix Lestrange.

Harry chases after Bellatrix. Voldemort arrives and tries to kill Harry, but is thwarted by Dumbledore. Ministry of Magic employees arrive; they spot Voldemort just before he escapes with Bellatrix, and Fudge is forced to accept his return. In his office, Dumbledore explains to Harry that the prophecy was made by Professor Trelawney, and predicted the birth of a child with power against Voldemort. This had caused Voldemort to pursue Harry's parents, and is the reason he continues to target Harry. Overwhelmed by the prophecy and mourning the loss of Sirius, Harry grows sullen, although the wizarding community now affords him great respect. Motivated by his friends, Harry returns to the Dursleys.