Thirteen-year-old Harry Potter spends another unhappy summer with the Dursleys. After Aunt Marge insults Harry and his deceased parents, an angry Harry accidentally inflates her. Fearing expulsion for using magic outside Hogwarts, Harry runs away; the Knight Bus, a vehicle that rescues stranded wizards, takes him to London. Harry encounters the Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, at the Leaky Cauldron in Diagon Alley, where Fudge asks Harry to remain until school starts. Harry reunites with his best friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. Ron's father warns Harry about Sirius Black, a convicted murderer who escaped from the wizards' prison, Azkaban, and is believed to be hunting down Harry.

Dementors, the guards of Azkaban, board the Hogwarts Express while hunting for Black. As one approaches, Harry faints after reliving his parents' deaths; the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, Remus Lupin, repels the Dementor with a Patronus charm. During a Divination lesson, Professor Sybill Trelawney says the dog-shaped form in Harry's tea leaves is the Grim, a spectral death omen. During a Quidditch match, Harry spots a black dog, faints and falls off his broomstick as dementors approach. Harry is unhurt, but the Whomping Willow destroys his broom. Lupin begins to teach Harry the Patronus charm.

Fred and George Weasley give Harry the Marauder's Map, a magical document created by four people known as "Moony", "Padfoot", "Wormtail" and "Prongs". The map shows every person at Hogwarts and seven secret tunnels out of the school. Harry, who lacks guardian permission for school outings, uses it to sneak into Hogsmeade, where he discovers that Black, his godfather, betrayed his parents to Voldemort and killed their friend Peter Pettigrew. Black breaks into Hogwarts twice, though Harry is unharmed.

Ron accuses Hermione's cat, Crookshanks, of killing his missing pet rat, Scabbers, straining their friendship. When Harry receives a Firebolt broomstick as an anonymous gift, Hermione has it confiscated for testing, fearing Black sent it. Ron and Harry are furious at Hermione. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Magic sentences Hagrid's hippogriff Buckbeak to death for injuring Draco Malfoy, who deliberately provoked the creature during a lesson. Harry, Ron and Hermione visit Hagrid prior to Buckbeak's execution, and Hermione discovers the missing Scabbers. The trio leave before Buckbeak is executed; on their way back to the castle, Scabbers escapes and Ron pursues him.

The black dog appears and drags Ron into a tunnel under the Whomping Willow. Harry and Hermione pursue them and end up in the Shrieking Shack. The dog reveals himself to be Black, an unregistered animagus. Lupin arrives, having seen Pettigrew's name on the Marauder's Map and realised that Pettigrew, not Black, betrayed James and Lily Potter to Voldemort. Hermione declares that Lupin is a werewolf, which he admits. Lupin explains that, as students, he (Moony), Black (Padfoot), Pettigrew (Wormtail) and James (Prongs) created the Marauder's Map. The latter three secretly became animagi to help Lupin during his werewolf transformations. Scabbers is Pettigrew in his rat form, and he faked his death while framing Black. Black escaped Azkaban after discovering Pettigrew was alive.

Professor Severus Snape arrives to apprehend Black, but Harry, Ron and Hermione simultaneously knock him unconscious. Lupin and Black prepare to kill Pettigrew, but Harry says he should be sent to Azkaban. As the full moon rises, Lupin transforms into a werewolf, having forgotten to take his Wolfsbane potion, which allows him to remain sane while transformed. Black fights Lupin off, but Pettigrew escapes amid the chaos. As dementors descend on Harry, Hermione and Black, a distant figure casts a powerful Patronus, scattering the dementors.

Black is captured by Snape and handed over to the Ministry. Professor Albus Dumbledore instructs Harry and Hermione to save Black and Buckbeak by going back in time with Hermione's Time-Turner, a Ministry device she has been using to attend her many classes simultaneously. They free Buckbeak, and Harry saves their earlier selves by casting the Patronus. Harry and Hermione release Black, who escapes on Buckbeak. Snape, enraged over Black's escape, intentionally lets slip that Lupin is a werewolf, forcing his resignation. Black writes Harry saying he sent the Firebolt and, as his legal guardian, gives Harry permission for school excursions.