At the Dursley residence, Harry Potter, the only son of James and Lily Potter, awakes with a vision of a Muggle, by the name of Frank Bryce, being murdered by Lord Voldemort and Wormtail. His scar starts to hurt, and he writes a letter to his godfather Sirius Black to inform him about the incident.

Over the summer, Harry visits the Weasleys, who bring him to attend the Quidditch World Cup final. Following the match, former supporters of Voldemort, known as Death Eaters, set fire to the campsite and set off the Dark Mark to cause a mass panic. Back at Hogwarts, Dumbledore announces the school will be hosting the Triwizard Tournament, in which champions from three schools will compete. During the selection, an object called the Goblet of Fire spits out names of three champions - Fleur Delacour from Beauxbatons, Viktor Krum from Durmstrang, and Cedric Diggory from Hogwarts. Unexpectedly, it spits out Harry's name as a fourth champion.

Harry is underage and does not enter himself into the tournament, but he is forced to compete under the rules. The champions must compete in three dangerous tasks over the course of the school year. The first task involves getting past a dragon, which Harry manages with a suggestion from "Mad-Eye" Moody, the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. The next task involves rescuing a friend, or close relative, from the lake. Harry completes the task using Gillyweed, offered to him by Dobby who overheard it as a solution from Moody.

Before the final task, a Yule Ball is announced and Harry must find a partner for the event, as champions traditonally commence the dance. Harry and Ron Weasley, ask Cho Chang and Hermione Granger, respectively, but are turned down as they are both going with other people. Finally, Harry manages to ask the Patil twins to accompany him and Ron. Ron is surprised when Hermione shows up with Krum, and ends the night having a massive argument with her about it in the Gryffindor common room, which Harry is forced to witness.

The final task requires champions to overcome a maze filled with obstacles to reach the Triwizard Cup at the centre. Harry and Cedric Diggory reach the Cup at the same time, and take it together to share the win. On touching the Cup, they are immediately transported to a graveyard. Harry recognizes the graveyard from a vision, and his scar starts burning. Wormtail appears and immediately kills Cedric with Voldemort's wand. He then subdues Harry, drops a frail-looking Voldemort into a giant cauldron, and proceeds to perform a ritual restoring Voldemort to his full body. Voldemort summons his Death Eaters and explains how he lost his powers a decade ago, when his Killing Curse on Harry Potter rebounded on him. He challenges Harry to a duel and they fire spells at each other. Their wandstreams end up connecting, in a rare phenomenon called Priori Incantatem. Manifestations of Voldemort's previous spells emerge, causing a distraction and allowing Harry to escape.

Back at Hogwarts, panic ensues seeing Harry with Cedric's dead body. Moody pulls Harry into his office and starts to question him about the graveyard. Harry realizes he must be a Death Eater in disguise, and is saved by the intervention of Dumbledore, McGonagall, and Snape. Under Veritaserum, they force Moody to reveal himself to be an impersonation, via Polyjuice Potion, of Barty Crouch Jr., an ex-Death Eater presumed dead. Crouch Jr. narrates how he aided Voldemort's return, by entering Harry into the tournament, ensuring his win and turning the Cup into a Portkey, to transport the winner to the graveyard for Voldemort's ritual. He is handed over to the Dementors who perform the Kiss on him, rendering him lifeless. The real Moody is found alive, locked under chains in his own chambers.

Harry recovers in the hospital wing, where he speaks with Cedric's grieving parents. As Dumbledore starts to make plans for Voldemort's return, Harry returns to live with the Dursleys for the summer.